# Blinding and randomization to reduce bias

The concept of the double-blind clinical experiment is well-established

-   The investigator does not know what treatment has been given to the
    patient

-   The patient does not know what drug they have received

This is accomplished by providing treatments that are identical in
appearance, taste, etc., but differ in their chemical composition and
hypothesized effects. An independent party has knowledge of the
treatment that has been administered, and can decode the treatment
assignments as needed.

The role of blinding in experimentation is reviewed in a [Nature
commentary](https://www.nature.com/articles/526187a), and the [Wikipedia
article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blinded_experiment) has many
useful references.

# Randomization to reduce bias

Once blinding has been accomplished it may seem unnecessary to take
further steps to eliminate bias in the evaluation of an experimental
comparison.

Blinding helps to eliminate specific forms of bias rooted in (possibly
un- or sub-conscious) investigator or participant actions that may
affect experimental outcomes or interpretation.

Other forms of bias can be mitigated using random allocation of
treatments to participants. As an illustration suppose an investigator
decides to use “alternating assignments”, and typically sees two
eligible patients a day. We could then have

                    Day 1    Day 2   Day 3 ....
    Treatment      A    B    A   B   A   B
    Time of day    AM   PM   AM  PM  AM  PM

A problem would arise if the characteristics of patients coming in the
morning were different from those coming in the afternoon. For example,
the patients arriving in the AM slot could tend to be older. The
comparison between treatments A and B would then be confounded with a
difference in average ages of patients in the experiment.

If, instead of alternation, the treatment assignment were randomized,
the patients receiving treatment A would have characteristics that are
*on average* indistinguishable from those receiving treatment B.

Details of the approach to randomization will have an impact on its
effectivness. Challenges can arise in multicenter studies with many
centers. The following display plots the excess numbers of patients
assigned to one arm in a trial, against the total number enrolled.

![Excursions 1](images/loose.jpg)

There are long stretches of time during which more patients in the study
are receiving one of the treatments than the other.

The use of a different approach to randomization, in which small blocks
of allocations are randomized independently, can reduce the size and
duration of periods of imbalance over time.

![Excursions 2](images/tight.jpg)

Randomization is a well-accepted tool in experimental design, but must
be conducted with care. The [wikipedia
article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Randomized_experiment) has some
interesting references on assessment of the overall effect of use of
randomization in health research.

# Discussion Questions

D.3.1
